feat: Editorial review: Add content for overlay and discrete animation features (#29943)
mdn/content: files/en-us/web/css/@starting-style/index.md

---
title: "@starting-style"
slug: Web/CSS/@starting-style
page-type: css-at-rule
status:
  - experimental
browser-compat: css.at-rules.starting-style
---

{{CSSRef}}{{SeeCompatTable}}

> The **`@starting-style`** [CSS](/en-US/docs/Web/CSS) [at-rule](/en-US/docs/Web/CSS/At-rule) is used to provide a set of starting values for properties set on an element that you want to transition from when the element receives its first style update.

Author: Good call; added.

> The **`@starting-style`** [CSS](/en-US/docs/Web/CSS) [at-rule](/en-US/docs/Web/CSS/At-rule) is used to provide a set of starting values for properties set on an element that you want to transition from when the element receives its first style update.

Author: I've used some of these suggestions and reduced some verbiage, but I feel that sentence needs to be whole, to get the meaning across properly.

> This is needed because, by default, [CSS transitions](/en-US/docs/Web/CSS/CSS_transitions) are not triggered on elements' first style updates, or when the [`display`](/en-US/docs/Web/CSS/display) type changes from `none` to another type, to avoid unexpected behavior. To put it another way, such elements do not have a starting style to transition from. `@starting-style` allows you to provide starting styles, overriding the default behavior in a specific controlled fashion.

Author: I've used some of this. I thought my first sentence was ok as-is, but your second half provides some nice explanations.

> This is needed because, by default, [CSS transitions](/en-US/docs/Web/CSS/CSS_transitions) are not triggered on elements' first style updates, or when the [`display`](/en-US/docs/Web/CSS/display) type changes from `none` to another type, to avoid unexpected behavior. To put it another way, such elements do not have a starting style to transition from. `@starting-style` allows you to provide starting styles, overriding the default behavior in a specific controlled fashion.

Author: Some suggestions used here, and also some suggestions from Etelle's review.

> This enables the easy creation of entry animations that were previously complex to achieve, such as animating elements when they are changed from `display: none` (this includes elements shown in the [top layer](/en-US/docs/Glossary/Top_layer) such as [popovers](/en-US/docs/Web/API/Popover_API) or modal {{htmlelement("dialog")}} elements) or when they are first added to the DOM.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This enables the creation of entry animations, such as the display of [popovers](/en-US/docs/Web/API/Popover_API) and modal {{htmlelement("dialog")}} elements, both displayed in the [top layer](/en-US/docs/Glossary/Top_layer), and other elements that are chang from `display: none` to being visible, including when an element is first added to the DOM.
```

Author: Good ideas here; I tweaked it a bit, but mostly used it.

> This enables the easy creation of entry animations that were previously complex to achieve, such as animating elements when they are changed from `display: none` (this includes elements shown in the [top layer](/en-US/docs/Glossary/Top_layer) such as [popovers](/en-US/docs/Web/API/Popover_API) or modal {{htmlelement("dialog")}} elements) or when they are first added to the DOM.

Author: I love this idea. I've simply moved the follow-on paragraphs to the Description section. I think it works pretty well like this.

> > **Note:** `@starting-style` is only relevant to CSS transitions. When animating from `display: none` or animating elements as they are first added to the DOM, [CSS animations](/en-US/docs/Web/CSS/CSS_animations) do not need a `@starting-style` specified; instead you provide the starting style as an explicit starting keyframe (for example using `0%` or `from`). See [Using CSS animations](/en-US/docs/Web/CSS/CSS_animations/Using_CSS_animations) for an example.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> **Note:** `@starting-style` is only relevant to CSS transitions. When using [CSS animations](/en-US/docs/Web/CSS/CSS_animations) to animate elements from `display: none` or as they are added to the DOM,  `@starting-style` is not needed; instead, provide the starting style as an explicit starting keyframe (for example using `0%` or `from`). See [Using CSS animations](/en-US/docs/Web/CSS/CSS_animations/Using_CSS_animations) for an example.
```
link to a specific example (with #) in the Using_CSS_animations page

Author: Good call; suggestion used, and specific URL to keyframe animation example inserted. Thanks for your review so far!

> > **Note:** `@starting-style` is only relevant to CSS transitions. When animating from `display: none` or animating elements as they are first added to the DOM, [CSS animations](/en-US/docs/Web/CSS/CSS_animations) do not need a `@starting-style` specified; instead you provide the starting style as an explicit starting keyframe (for example using `0%` or `from`). See [Using CSS animations](/en-US/docs/Web/CSS/CSS_animations/Using_CSS_animations) for an example.

Author: I've improved this in a slightly different way.

## Syntax

```css
@starting-style {rules}
@starting-style {declarations}
```

where:

- _rules_
  - : Is the set of CSS rules providing the starting styles for the transition, when `@starting-style` is used in standalone style.

> - _rules_

Author: Good catch, thanks; updated.

>   - : Is the set of CSS declarations providing the starting styles for the transition, when `@starting-style` is nested inside a particular ruleset.

Author: This is certainly a lot shorter. Thanks for the suggestion; updated!

## Description

> There are two ways to use `@starting-style`. Let's consider an example where we want to animate a popover when it is shown (added to the top layer). In this case, the original rule specifying the styles for the popover once opened looks like this (you can see the [full example in action](/en-US/docs/Web/CSS/@starting-style#animating_a_popover) in the examples section):

Author: updated

```css
[popover]:popover-open {
  opacity: 1;
  transform: scaleX(1);
}
```

> You can specify the starting styles in a separate rule contained within a standalone `@starting-style` block:

Author: updated

```css
@starting-style {
  [popover]:popover-open {
    opacity: 0;
    transform: scaleX(0);
  }
}
```

> > **Note:** In the standalone case, you need to specify the `@starting-style` block after the original rule for it to take effect, as the specificity of each is the same. If `@starting-style` was specified first, the original styles would override it.

Author: updated

> Alternatively, you can nest the starting styles inside the original rule:

Author: updated

```css
[popover]:popover-open {
  opacity: 1;
  transform: scaleX(1);

  @starting-style {
    opacity: 0;
    transform: scaleX(0);
  }
}
```

## Formal syntax

> {{csssyntax}}

Author: The data was added and merged - see https://github.com/mdn/data/pull/688. So it should be displaying. I think we should leave it there for now.

## Examples

### Animating a popover

> This example shows how a [popover](/en-US/docs/Web/API/Popover_API) can be animated using [CSS transitions](/en-US/docs/Web/CSS/CSS_transitions). Basic entry and exit animations are provided.

Author: updated

> The HTML contains a {{htmlelement("div")}} element declared as a popover using the [popover](/en-US/docs/Web/HTML/Global_attributes/popover) attribute, and a {{htmlelement("button")}} element designated as the popover's toggle control using its [popovertarget](/en-US/docs/Web/HTML/Element/button#popovertarget) attribute.

Author: Updated

```html
<button popovertarget="mypopover">Toggle the popover</button>
<div popover="auto" id="mypopover">I'm a Popover! I should animate.</div>
```

> The CSS for the example looks like this:

Author: I usually do, but in this case, there is a lot of explanation. You generally need to be able to see the code for the explanation to be helpful; in cases where the explanation is large, I think it is more useful to look at the code first.

```css
html {
  font-family: Arial, Helvetica, sans-serif;
}

[popover]:popover-open {
  opacity: 1;
  transform: scaleX(1);
}

[popover] {
  font-size: 1.2rem;
  padding: 10px;
  opacity: 0;
  transform: scaleX(0);
  transition:
    opacity 0.7s,
    transform 0.7s,
    overlay 0.7s allow-discrete,
    display 0.7s allow-discrete;
}

/* Needs to be included after the previous [popover]:popover-open rule
   to take effect, as the specificity is the same */
@starting-style {
  [popover]:popover-open {
    opacity: 0;
    transform: scaleX(0);
  }
}

/* Transition for the popover's backdrop */

[popover]::backdrop {
  background-color: rgba(0, 0, 0, 0);
  transition:
    display 0.7s allow-discrete,
    overlay 0.7s allow-discrete,
    background-color 0.7s;
}

[popover]:popover-open::backdrop {
  background-color: rgba(0, 0, 0, 0.25);
}

/* This starting-style rule cannot be nested inside the above selector
because the nesting selector cannot represent pseudo-elements. */

@starting-style {
  [popover]:popover-open::backdrop {
    background-color: rgba(0, 0, 0, 0);
  }
}

> ```

Author: updated

> The two properties we want to animate are [`opacity`](/en-US/docs/Web/CSS/opacity) and [`transform`](/en-US/docs/Web/CSS/transform) (specifically, a horizontally scaling transform): we want the popover to fade in and out, as well as growing/shrinking horizontally. To achieve this, we have set a starting state for these properties on the default hidden state of the popover element (selected via `[popover]`), and an end state on the open state of the popover (selected via the [`:popover-open`](/en-US/docs/Web/CSS/:popover-open) pseudo-class).

Author: updated

> We then set a [`transition`](/en-US/docs/Web/CSS/transition) property to animate between the two, and include a starting state for the animation inside a [`@starting-style`](/en-US/docs/Web/CSS/@starting-style) at-rule, as described above, so the entry animation will work.

Author: updated

> However, because the animated element is being promoted to the [top layer](/en-US/docs/Glossary/Top_layer) when shown and removed from the top layer when hidden — which also means that its hidden state has [`display: none`](/en-US/docs/Web/CSS/display) set on it — some extra steps are required to get the animation working in both directions:

Author: updated

- `display` is added to the list of transitioned elements so that the animated element is visible (set to `display: block`) throughout both the entry and exit animation. Without this, the exit animation would not be visible; in effect, the popover would just disappear. Note that the [`transition-behavior: allow-discrete`](/en-US/docs/Web/CSS/transition-behavior) value is also set in the shorthand so that it will animate.

> - [`overlay`](/en-US/docs/Web/CSS/overlay) is added to the list of transitioned elements to make sure that the removal of the element from the top layer is deferred until the animation has been completed. This doesn't make a huge difference for simple animations such as this one, but in more complex cases not doing this can result in the element being removed from the overlay too quickly, meaning the animation is not smooth or effective. Again, `transition-behavior: allow-discrete` is required in this case for the animation to occur.

Author: I've used a bunch of these suggestions.

> You'll note that we've also included a transition on the [`::backdrop`](/en-US/docs/Web/CSS/::backdrop) that appears behind the popover when it opens, to provide a nice darkening animation. `[popover]:popover-open::backdrop` is needed to select the backdrop when the popover is open.

Author: Nah, I've put it in a note block instead. But I have updated the wording as per your suggestions.

> The code renders as follows:

Author: I don't think this is necessary. There is an explanation above to say what it does, and it is a button. It's pretty obvious that you've got to press it. And also, you don't need to reload the page to revert the state; it is a toggle button.

> The code renders as follows:

Reviewer 2: Okay

{{ EmbedLiveSample("Animating a popover", "100%", "200") }}

> ### Transitioning elements as they are added to and removed from the DOM

Author: Yup, shorter is better; updated

> In this example, we provide a button that appends new elements to a {{htmlelement("section")}} container when pressed. Each element is given a nested close button which, when pressed, removes the element again. We use transitions to animate the elements when they are first added to the DOM, and when they are removed.

Author: Updated.

The static HTML looks like this:

```html
<button>Create new column</button>
<section></section>
```

> The JavaScript that handles the adding and removing looks like this:

Author: updated

btn.addEventListener("click", createColumn);

function randomColor() {
  function randomChannel() {
    return Math.floor(Math.random() * 255);
  }

  return `rgb(${randomChannel()},${randomChannel()},${randomChannel()})`;
}

function createColumn() {
  const divElem = document.createElement("div");
  divElem.style.backgroundColor = randomColor();

  const closeBtn = document.createElement("button");
  closeBtn.textContent = "✖";
  closeBtn.setAttribute("aria-label", "close");
  divElem.append(closeBtn);
  sectionElem.append(divElem);

  closeBtn.addEventListener("click", () => {
    divElem.classList.add("fade-out");

    setTimeout(() => {
      divElem.remove();
    }, 1000);
  });
}
```

The most interesting part is the `createColumn()` function — note how it creates a {{htmlelement("div")}} element and a {{htmlelement("button")}} element to close the `<div>` when pressed then appends the `<button>` to the `<div>`, and the `<div>` to the `<section>` container. We then:

- Add an event listener to the close button via {{domxref("EventTarget.addEventListener", "addEventListener")}} that adds a `fade-out` class to the `<div>` (this triggers the exit animation on it)

> - Use {{domxref("setTimeout")}} to delay the removal of the `<div>` from the DOM (via {{domxref("Element.remove()")}}) until after the animation has finished.

Author: I'd prefer to keep it here, for he same reasons as discussed earlier.

Let's move on to the CSS:

```css
html * {
  box-sizing: border-box;
  font-family: sans-serif;
}

body {
  margin: 0;
  display: flex;
  flex-direction: column;
  height: 100vh;
  gap: 10px;
}

body > button {
  margin: 10px 10px 0 10px;
}

section {
  display: flex;
  flex: 1;
  gap: 10px;
  margin: 10px;
}

div {
  flex: 1;
  border: 1px solid gray;
  position: relative;
  background: linear-gradient(
    to right,
    rgba(255, 255, 255, 0),
    rgba(255, 255, 255, 0.5)
  );
  opacity: 1;
  transform: scaleY(1);

  transition:
    opacity 0.7s,
    transform 0.7s,
    display 0.7s allow-discrete;
}

> /* Needs to be included after the previous div rule
>    to take effect, as the specificity is the same */

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
/* Include after the `div` rule */
```

Author: updated

@starting-style {
  div {
    opacity: 0;
    transform: scaleY(0);
  }
}

.fade-out {
  opacity: 0;
  display: none;
  transform: scaleY(0);
}

div > button {
  font-size: 1.6rem;
  background: none;
  border: 0;
  text-shadow: 2px 1px 1px white;
  border-radius: 15px;
  position: absolute;
  top: 1px;
  right: 1px;
  cursor: pointer;
}
```

> We want to transition [`opacity`](/en-US/docs/Web/CSS/opacity) and [`transform`](/en-US/docs/Web/CSS/transform) on each `<div>` as it is added to the DOM, and then reverse the animation as it is removed again. To do this, we:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
To animate [`opacity`](/en-US/docs/Web/CSS/opacity) and [`transform`](/en-US/docs/Web/CSS/transform) on each `<div>` as it is added to the DOM and then reverse the animation as it is removed from the DOM, we:
```

Author: Updated

> - Specify the end state of the properties we want to transition on the `div { ... }` rule.
> - Specify the starting state we would like to transition the properties from inside a `@starting-state` block.
> - Specify the exit animation inside the `.fade-out` rule — this is the class that our JavaScript applies to the `<div>` elements when their close buttons are pressed. Note that as well as setting the `opacity` and `transform` end states, we are also setting [`display: none`](/en-US/docs/Web/CSS/display) on the `<div>`s — we want them to be immediately not available when removed from the UI.
> - Specify the [`transition`](/en-US/docs/Web/CSS/display) list inside the `div { ... }` rule to get `opacity`, `transform`, and `display` animating. Note that in the case of `display`, [`transition-behavior: allow-discrete`](/en-US/docs/Web/CSS/transition-behavior) value is also set in the shorthand so that it will animate.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- Specify the ending state of the properties we want to transition in the `div { ... }` rule.
- Specify the starting state from which to transition the properties within a `@starting-style` block.
- Specify the exit animation inside the `.fade-out` rule — this is the class that the JavaScript code assigns to the `<div>` elements when their close buttons are pressed. Besides setting the `opacity` and `transform` ending states, we also set [`display: none`](/en-US/docs/Web/CSS/display) on the `<div>`s; we want them to become immediately unavailable when removed from the UI.
- Specify the [`transition`](/en-US/docs/Web/CSS/transition) list within the `div { ... }` rule to animate `opacity`, `transform`, and `display`. Note that for `display`, [`transition-behavior: allow-discrete`](/en-US/docs/Web/CSS/transition-behavior) value is also set in the shorthand so that it will animate.
```

Author: Mostly applied

Reviewer 2: - `@starting-state` should be `@starting-style`?
- [`transition`](/en-US/docs/Web/CSS/transition) - this is linked to the display property page?

Author: Heh, thank you for spotting those. Fixed now!

> The final result looks like this:

Reviewer 2: or we can say how the readers can interact with the result frame and what they can expect

Author: I'm not sure what the above change is suggesting; it seems to be undoing some of your previous suggestions.

Reviewer 2: This is similar to my comment in the previous example near the "Result" frame about explicitly saying "Click the ... button" in the Result frame.

Author: Ah, OK. I think this is OK as-is.

> {{ EmbedLiveSample("Transitioning elements as they are added to and removed from the DOM", "100%", "400") }}

Reviewer 2: might need an update based on the title change

Author: Sure does; thank you m'aam.

## Specifications

{{Specifications}}

## Browser compatibility

{{Compat}}

## See also

- [`overlay`](/en-US/docs/Web/CSS/overlay)
- [`transition-behavior`](/en-US/docs/Web/CSS/transition-behavior)
- [Four new CSS features for smooth entry and exit animations](https://developer.chrome.com/blog/entry-exit-animations/) on developer.chrome.com (2023)

> - {{domxref("CSSStartingStyleRule")}}

Reviewer 2: We can move the domxref link before the external link

Author: ok, done!

---
title: "@starting-style"
slug: Web/CSS/@starting-style
page-type: css-at-rule
status:
  - experimental
browser-compat: css.at-rules.starting-style
---

{{CSSRef}}{{SeeCompatTable}}

The **`@starting-style`** [CSS](/en-US/docs/Web/CSS) [at-rule](/en-US/docs/Web/CSS/At-rule) is used to define starting values for properties set on an element that you want to transition from when the element receives its first style update, i.e. when an element is first displayed on a previously loaded page.

## Syntax

```css
@starting-style { rules } /* when standalone */

> @starting-style { declarations } /* when nested within a ruleset */

Author: I think you've got a good point here. I've looked at the `@supports` page, and tried to write something in the same style for `@starting-style`. Let me know what you think!

```

## Description

> By default, [CSS transitions](/en-US/docs/Web/CSS/CSS_transitions) are not triggered on an element's initial style update, or when its [`display`](/en-US/docs/Web/CSS/display) type changes from `none` to another type, to avoid unexpected behavior. `@starting-style` rules are needed to enable first-style transitions; they provide starting styles for elements that do not have a previous state with starting styles to transition from.

Author: Yup, that sounds good. I've used this wording in my next commit.

> `@starting-style` enables the creation of entry and exit transitions for elements displayed in the [top layer](/en-US/docs/Glossary/Top_layer) (such as [popovers](/en-US/docs/Web/API/Popover_API) and modal {{htmlelement("dialog")}}s), elements that are changing to and from `display: none`, and elements when first added to or removed from the DOM.

Author: Sure, makes sense. Updated.

> **Note:** `@starting-style` is only relevant to CSS transitions. When using [CSS animations](/en-US/docs/Web/CSS/CSS_animations) to animate such elements, `@starting-style` is not needed; instead, provide the starting style as an explicit starting keyframe (using `0%` or `from`). See [Using CSS animations](/en-US/docs/Web/CSS/CSS_animations/Using_CSS_animations#animating_display_and_content-visibility) for an example.

There are two ways to use `@starting-style`: as a standalone rule or nested within a ruleset.

> Let's consider a scenario where we want to animate a [popover](/en-US/docs/Web/API/Popover_API) when shown (that is, when added to the top layer). The "original rule" specifying the styles for the open popover looks like this (see the [full example in action](/en-US/docs/Web/CSS/@starting-style#animating_a_popover) in the "Examples" section below):

Author: Good spot, updated, thanks!

```css
[popover]:popover-open {
  opacity: 1;
  transform: scaleX(1);
}
```

To specify the starting style for the popover using the first method, you include a standalone `@starting-style` block in your CSS, as shown below:

```css
@starting-style {
  [popover]:popover-open {
    opacity: 0;
    transform: scaleX(0);
  }
}
```

> > **Note:** The `@starting-style` at-rule and the "original rule" have the same specificity. To ensure that starting styles get applied, include the `@starting-style` at-rule _after_ the "original rule". If you specify the `@starting-style` at-rule before the "original rule", the original styles will override the starting styles.

Author: Updated!

> To specify the starting style for the popover using the second method, you can nest the `@starting-style` block inside the "original rule", as shown below:

Author: updated

```css
[popover]:popover-open {
  opacity: 1;
  transform: scaleX(1);

  @starting-style {
    opacity: 0;
    transform: scaleX(0);
  }
}
```

## Formal syntax

{{csssyntax}}

## Examples

> ### Animating a popover

Author: Your example looks fine, but I have already added an appropriate example to the `<dialog>` reference pages. So I've a note to link to that rather than adding another new example here. The page is already pretty long.

This example shows how a [popover](/en-US/docs/Web/API/Popover_API) can be animated using [CSS transitions](/en-US/docs/Web/CSS/CSS_transitions). Basic entry and exit animations are provided using the [`transition`](/en-US/docs/Web/CSS/transition) property.

#### HTML

The HTML contains a {{htmlelement("div")}} element declared as a popover using the [popover](/en-US/docs/Web/HTML/Global_attributes/popover) attribute and a {{htmlelement("button")}} element designated as the popover's toggle control using its [popovertarget](/en-US/docs/Web/HTML/Element/button#popovertarget) attribute.

```html
<button popovertarget="mypopover">Toggle the popover</button>
<div popover="auto" id="mypopover">I'm a Popover! I should animate.</div>
```

#### CSS

The CSS for the example looks like this:

```css
html {
  font-family: Arial, Helvetica, sans-serif;

> }

Author: In cases such as this where there are only a couple of non-example-relevant styles being used, I think it is fine to show them as they don't get in the way. If there were huge blocks of non-critical styles being used in the setup of the example, I would of course hide those. 

No change made.

[popover]:popover-open {
  opacity: 1;
  transform: scaleX(1);
}

[popover] {
  font-size: 1.2rem;
  padding: 10px;

>   opacity: 0;

Author: It is needed for the final state of the exit animation. I have added a code comment to state this. On this page and on the other pages where this example appears.

  transform: scaleX(0);
  transition:
    opacity 0.7s,
    transform 0.7s,
    overlay 0.7s allow-discrete,
    display 0.7s allow-discrete;
  /* Equivalent to
    all 0.7s allow-discrete */
}

/* Include after the [popover]:popover-open rule */
@starting-style {
  [popover]:popover-open {
    opacity: 0;
    transform: scaleX(0);
  }
}

/* Transition for the popover's backdrop */
[popover]::backdrop {
  background-color: rgb(0 0 0 / 0);
  transition:
    display 0.7s allow-discrete,
    overlay 0.7s allow-discrete,
    background-color 0.7s;
  /* Equivalent to

>     all 0.7s allow-discrete */

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    transition: all 0.7s allow-discrete; */
```

Author: Yup; good call. Changed in all places it appears.

}

[popover]:popover-open::backdrop {
  background-color: rgb(0 0 0 / 0.25);
}

> /* Nesting is not supported for pseudo-elements

Author: Updated

so specify a standalone starting-style block. */
@starting-style {
  [popover]:popover-open::backdrop {
    background-color: rgb(0 0 0 / 0);
  }
}
```

> In this example, we want to animate two properties, [`opacity`](/en-US/docs/Web/CSS/opacity) and [`transform`](/en-US/docs/Web/CSS/transform) (specifically, a horizontally scaling transform), to make the popover to fade in and out, as well as grow and shrink horizontally. To achieve this, we have set a starting state for these properties on the default hidden state of the popover element (selected via `[popover]`), and an ending state on the open state of the popover (selected via the [`:popover-open`](/en-US/docs/Web/CSS/:popover-open) pseudo-class).

Author: Good spot. Updated.

We then set a [`transition`](/en-US/docs/Web/CSS/transition) property to animate between the two states. A starting state for the animation is included inside a `@starting-style` at-rule to enable the entry animation.

However, because the animated element is being promoted to the [top layer](/en-US/docs/Glossary/Top_layer) when shown and removed from the top layer when hidden — which also means that its hidden state has [`display: none`](/en-US/docs/Web/CSS/display) set on it — some extra steps are required to ensure the animation works in both directions:

> - `display` is added to the list of transitioned elements to ensure the animated element is visible (set to `display: block`) throughout both the entry and exit animations. Without this, the exit animation would not be visible; in effect, the popover would just disappear. Note that the [`transition-behavior: allow-discrete`](/en-US/docs/Web/CSS/transition-behavior) value is also set in the shorthand to activate the animation.

Author: In the example, `display: block` is set by the browser default styles when the popover is shown. Nevertheless, your change makes sense, so I've done the update.

- [`overlay`](/en-US/docs/Web/CSS/overlay) is added to the list of transitioned elements to ensure that the removal of the element from the top layer is deferred until the animation has been completed. This doesn't make a huge difference for simple animations such as this one, but in more complex cases not doing this can result in the element being removed from the overlay too quickly, meaning the animation is not smooth or effective. Again, `transition-behavior: allow-discrete` is required in this case for the animation to occur.

> **Note:** We've also included a transition on the [`::backdrop`](/en-US/docs/Web/CSS/::backdrop) that appears behind the popover when it opens, to provide a nice darkening animation. `[popover]:popover-open::backdrop` is used to select the backdrop when the popover is open.

#### Result

The code renders as follows:

{{ EmbedLiveSample("Animating a popover", "100%", "200") }}

### Transitioning elements on DOM addition and removal

> This example contains a button, which when pressed, appends new elements to a {{htmlelement("section")}} container. Each element, in turn, contains a nested button, which when pressed, removes the element. This example demonstrates how to use transitions to animate elements when they are added to the DOM and when they are removed.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This example contains a button, which when pressed, appends new elements to a {{htmlelement("section")}} container. Each element, in turn, contains a nested button, which when pressed, removes the element. This example demonstrates how to use transitions to animate elements when they are added or removed from the DOM.
```

Author: Updated.

#### HTML

> The static HTML looks like this:

Reviewer: in the css section of MDN, we include the headers and only include text before the code blocks if there is something to point out in the code blocks. otherwise, it's just the HTML, CSS, JS, and Result headers.

Author: OK. I've removed the lead-in lines that don't really add anything.

```html
<button>Create new column</button>
<section></section>
```

#### JavaScript

> The JavaScript code that handles the addition and removal of the elements looks like this:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
JavaScript enables the addition and removal of elements.
```

Author: Updated

```js
const btn = document.querySelector("button");
const sectionElem = document.querySelector("section");

btn.addEventListener("click", createColumn);

> function randomColor() {
>   function randomChannel() {
>     return Math.floor(Math.random() * 255);
>   }
> 
>   return `rgb(${randomChannel()},${randomChannel()},${randomChannel()})`;
> }

Reviewer: ```suggestion
function randomColor() {
  function hexVal() {
    return Math.floor(Math.random() * 255);
  }

  return `rgb(${hexVal()} ${hexVal()} ${hexVal()})`;
}
```
or other shorter variable name so the code can appear on one line.
removed commas and put in spaces in the RGB() value

Author: Good call. I was a bit concerned with `hexVal` because I thought people could interpret it as "hex value" in the CSS sense, rather than more generically as a hexadecimal number representation, which does make sense.

I've therefore gone for the more generic `randomNum`, which is still shorter and allows it all to fit on one line.

I've also changed the commas for spaces.

function createColumn() {
  const divElem = document.createElement("div");
  divElem.style.backgroundColor = randomColor();

  const closeBtn = document.createElement("button");
  closeBtn.textContent = "✖";
  closeBtn.setAttribute("aria-label", "close");
  divElem.append(closeBtn);
  sectionElem.append(divElem);

  closeBtn.addEventListener("click", () => {

>     divElem.classList.add("fade-out");

Reviewer: do we need a class name? aren't we targeting all behaviors based on them being added or removed?

    setTimeout(() => {
      divElem.remove();
    }, 1000);
  });
}
```

> The most interesting part is the `createColumn()` function. Notice how it creates a {{htmlelement("div")}} element and a {{htmlelement("button")}} element to close the `<div>` when pressed, then appends the `<button>` to the `<div>`, and the `<div>` to the `<section>` container. We then:

Author: Sure; updated.

- Add an event listener to the close button via {{domxref("EventTarget.addEventListener", "addEventListener")}} that adds a `fade-out` class to the `<div>` (this triggers the exit animation on it).
- Use {{domxref("setTimeout")}} to delay the removal of the `<div>` from the DOM (via {{domxref("Element.remove()")}}) until after the animation has finished.

> 

Author: Sure, this reads well. I've used it, with a bit of modification.

#### CSS

> Let's move on to the CSS:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The parts of the CSS relevant to this example include:
```
Then hide all the fonts, border, padding, etc.

Author: I removed that sentence in a previous edit because you said it was the kind of thing we don't normally include in the CSS section. 

I've hidden the first 4 rules of the block, as they weren't relevant to what I am explaining.

```css
html * {
  box-sizing: border-box;
  font-family: sans-serif;
}

body {
  margin: 0;
  display: flex;
  flex-direction: column;
  height: 100vh;
  gap: 10px;
}

body > button {
  margin: 10px 10px 0 10px;
}

section {
  display: flex;
  flex: 1;
  gap: 10px;
  margin: 10px;
}

div {
  flex: 1;
  border: 1px solid gray;
  position: relative;
  background: linear-gradient(
    to right,
    rgb(255 255 255 / 0),
    rgb(255 255 255 / 0.5)
  );
  opacity: 1;

>   transform: scaleY(1);

Reviewer: ```suggestion
 scaleY: 1 1;
```

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
  scale: 1 1;
```

Author: OK; updated example to use `scale` rather than `transform: scaleY(1)`.

  transition:
    opacity 0.7s,

>     transform 0.7s,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    scale 0.7s,
```

Author: changed

    display 0.7s allow-discrete;
    all 0.7s allow-discrete
    /* Equivalent to
    all 0.7s allow-discrete */
}

/* Include after the `div` rule */
@starting-style {
  div {
    opacity: 0;

>     transform: scaleY(0);

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    scale: 1 0;
```

  }
}

.fade-out {
  opacity: 0;
  display: none;

>   transform: scaleY(0);

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  scale: 1 0;
```

Author: changed

}

div > button {
  font-size: 1.6rem;
  background: none;
  border: 0;
  text-shadow: 2px 1px 1px white;
  border-radius: 15px;
  position: absolute;
  top: 1px;
  right: 1px;
  cursor: pointer;
}
```

> To animate [`opacity`](/en-US/docs/Web/CSS/opacity) and [`transform`](/en-US/docs/Web/CSS/transform) on each `<div>` as it is added to the DOM and then reverse the animation as it is removed from the DOM, we:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To animate the [`opacity`](/en-US/docs/Web/CSS/opacity) and [`scale`](/en-US/docs/Web/CSS/scale) of each `<div>` as it is added to the DOM and then reverse the animation as it is removed from the DOM, we:
```
changed the above transforms to scale just so i could change this sentence; to dually use the properties also as adjectives

Author: OK. Updated.

- Specify the ending state of the properties we want to transition on the `div { ... }` rule.
- Specify the starting state from which to transition the properties inside a `@starting-state` block.

> - Specify the exit animation inside the `.fade-out` rule — this is the class that the JavaScript assigns to the `<div>` elements when their close buttons are pressed. Besides setting the `opacity` and `transform` ending states, we also set [`display: none`](/en-US/docs/Web/CSS/display) on the `<div>`s — we want them to become immediately unavailable when removed from the UI.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Specify the exit animation inside the `.fade-out` rule — this is the class that the JavaScript assigns to the `<div>` elements when their close buttons are pressed. Besides setting the `opacity` and `scale` ending states, we also set [`display: none`](/en-US/docs/Web/CSS/display) on the `<div>`s — we want them to become immediately unavailable when removed from the UI.
```
is "we want them to become immediately unavailable when removed from the UI" a preference or a requirement?

Author: Changed. 

I was thinking that we want to make sure those elements are not available to be interacted with once the close button is clicked, e.g. so the user can't accidentally click it again, which might cause problems.

Author: It's really a preference, but it is a good idea.

> - Specify the [`transition`](/en-US/docs/Web/CSS/display) list inside the `div { ... }` rule to animate `opacity`, `transform`, and `display`. Note that for `display`, the [`transition-behavior: allow-discrete`](/en-US/docs/Web/CSS/transition-behavior) value is also set in the shorthand so that it will animate.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Specify the [`transition`](/en-US/docs/Web/CSS/display) list inside the `div { ... }` rule to animate `opacity`, `scale`, and `display`. Note that for `display`, the [`transition-behavior: allow-discrete`](/en-US/docs/Web/CSS/transition-behavior) value is also set in the shorthand so that it will animate.
```

Author: changed

---
title: "@starting-style"
slug: Web/CSS/@starting-style
page-type: css-at-rule
status:
  - experimental
browser-compat: css.at-rules.starting-style
---

{{CSSRef}}{{SeeCompatTable}}

The **`@starting-style`** [CSS](/en-US/docs/Web/CSS) [at-rule](/en-US/docs/Web/CSS/At-rule) is used to define starting values for properties set on an element that you want to transition from when the element receives its first style update, i.e. when an element is first displayed on a previously loaded page.

## Syntax

The `@starting-style` at rule can be used in two ways:

1. As a standalone block, in which case it contains one or more rulesets defining starting style declarations and selecting the elements they apply to:

   ```css
   @starting-style {
     rulesets
   }
   ```

2. Nested within an existing ruleset, in which case it contains one or more declarations defining starting styles for the elements already selected by that ruleset:

   ```css
   selector { /* existing ruleset */
     /* ... */

     @starting-style {
       declarations
     }
   }
   ```

## Description

> To avoid unexpected behavior, [CSS transitions](/en-US/docs/Web/CSS/CSS_transitions) are by default not triggered on an element's initial style update, or when its [`display`](/en-US/docs/Web/CSS/display) type changes from `none` to another type. To enable first-style transitions, `@starting-style` rules are needed. They provide starting styles for elements that do not have a previous state, defining the styles to transition from.

Author: looking good. Updated.

`@starting-style` is especially useful when creating entry and exit transitions for elements displayed in the [top layer](/en-US/docs/Glossary/Top_layer) (such as [popovers](/en-US/docs/Web/API/Popover_API) and modal {{htmlelement("dialog")}}s), elements that are changing to and from `display: none`, and elements when first added to or removed from the DOM.

> **Note:** `@starting-style` is only relevant to CSS transitions. When using [CSS animations](/en-US/docs/Web/CSS/CSS_animations) to animate such elements, `@starting-style` is not needed; instead, provide the starting style as an explicit starting keyframe (using `0%` or `from`). See [Using CSS animations](/en-US/docs/Web/CSS/CSS_animations/Using_CSS_animations#animating_display_and_content-visibility) for an example.

There are two ways to use `@starting-style`: as a standalone rule or nested within a ruleset.

> Let's consider a scenario where we want to animate a [popover](/en-US/docs/Web/API/Popover_API) when shown (that is, when added to the top layer). The "original rule" specifying the styles for the open popover looks like this (see the [full example in action](#animating_a_popover) in the "Examples" section below):

Author: updated

```css
[popover]:popover-open {
  opacity: 1;
  transform: scaleX(1);
}
```

> To specify the starting style for the popover using the first method, you include a standalone `@starting-style` block in your CSS, as shown below:

Author: Sounds reasonable. I've used it, with a slight tweak to make the sentence flow better:

> To specify the starting values of the popover's properties that will be animated using the first method

> To specify the starting values of the popover's properties that will be animated using the first method, you include a standalone `@starting-style` block in your CSS, as shown below:

Author: updated

```css
@starting-style {
  [popover]:popover-open {
    opacity: 0;
    transform: scaleX(0);
  }
}
```

> **Note:** The `@starting-style` at-rule and the "original rule" have the same {{cssxref("specificity")}}. To ensure that starting styles get applied, include the `@starting-style` at-rule _after_ the "original rule". If you specify the `@starting-style` at-rule before the "original rule", the original styles will override the starting styles.

> To specify the starting style for the popover using the nested method, you can nest the `@starting-style` block inside the "original rule", as shown below:

Author: updated

```css
[popover]:popover-open {
  opacity: 1;
  transform: scaleX(1);

  @starting-style {
    opacity: 0;
    transform: scaleX(0);
  }
}
```

## Formal syntax

{{csssyntax}}

## Examples

### Animating a popover

> This example shows how a [popover](/en-US/docs/Web/API/Popover_API) can be animated using [CSS transitions](/en-US/docs/Web/CSS/CSS_transitions). Basic entry and exit animations are provided using the [`transition`](/en-US/docs/Web/CSS/transition) property.

Author: updated. Although to be honest, I don't see why it's a problem at all having slight different text styles for things like this. It makes the docs less boring and robotized.

#### HTML

The HTML contains a {{htmlelement("div")}} element declared as a popover using the [popover](/en-US/docs/Web/HTML/Global_attributes/popover) attribute and a {{htmlelement("button")}} element designated as the popover's toggle control using its [popovertarget](/en-US/docs/Web/HTML/Element/button#popovertarget) attribute.

```html
<button popovertarget="mypopover">Toggle the popover</button>
<div popover="auto" id="mypopover">I'm a Popover! I should animate.</div>
```

#### CSS

> 

Author: moved

```css
html {
  font-family: Arial, Helvetica, sans-serif;
}

[popover]:popover-open {
  opacity: 1;
  transform: scaleX(1);
}

[popover] {
  font-size: 1.2rem;
  padding: 10px;

  /* Final state of the exit animation */
  opacity: 0;
  transform: scaleX(0);

  transition:
    opacity 0.7s,
    transform 0.7s,
    overlay 0.7s allow-discrete,
    display 0.7s allow-discrete;
  /* Equivalent to
  transition: all 0.7s allow-discrete; */
}

/* Include after the [popover]:popover-open rule */
@starting-style {
  [popover]:popover-open {
    opacity: 0;
    transform: scaleX(0);
  }
}

/* Transition for the popover's backdrop */
[popover]::backdrop {
  background-color: rgb(0 0 0 / 0);
  transition:
    display 0.7s allow-discrete,
    overlay 0.7s allow-discrete,
    background-color 0.7s;
  /* Equivalent to
  transition: all 0.7s allow-discrete; */
}

[popover]:popover-open::backdrop {
  background-color: rgb(0 0 0 / 0.25);
}

/* Nesting (&) is not supported for pseudo-elements
so specify a standalone starting-style block. */
@starting-style {
  [popover]:popover-open::backdrop {
    background-color: rgb(0 0 0 / 0);
  }
}
```

> In this example, we want to animate two properties, [`opacity`](/en-US/docs/Web/CSS/opacity) and [`transform`](/en-US/docs/Web/CSS/transform) (specifically, a horizontally scaling transform), to make the popover fade in and out as well as grow and shrink horizontally. To achieve this, we have set a starting state for these properties on the default hidden state of the popover element (selected via `[popover]`), and an ending state on the open state of the popover (selected via the [`:popover-open`](/en-US/docs/Web/CSS/:popover-open) pseudo-class).

Author: done

We then set a [`transition`](/en-US/docs/Web/CSS/transition) property to animate between the two states. A starting state for the animation is included inside a `@starting-style` at-rule to enable the entry animation.

> However, because the animated element is being promoted to the [top layer](/en-US/docs/Glossary/Top_layer) when shown and removed from the top layer when hidden — which also means that its hidden state has [`display: none`](/en-US/docs/Web/CSS/display) set on it — some extra steps are required to ensure the animation works in both directions:

Reviewer: Should we invert the sentence? I find it confusing. What makes it mean that its hidden state has display none?

Author: I've tried to simplify it, as follows:

> However, because the animated element is being promoted to the [top layer](/en-US/docs/Glossary/Top_layer) when shown and removed from the top layer when hidden (with [`display: none`](/en-US/docs/Web/CSS/display)), some extra steps are required to ensure the animation works in both directions:

Any better?

Reviewer: Yes. Perfect.

- `display` is added to the list of transitioned elements to ensure the animated element is visible (set to `display: block` or another visible `display` value) throughout both the entry and exit animations. Without this, the exit animation would not be visible; in effect, the popover would just disappear. Note that the [`transition-behavior: allow-discrete`](/en-US/docs/Web/CSS/transition-behavior) value is also set in the shorthand to activate the animation.

> - [`overlay`](/en-US/docs/Web/CSS/overlay) is added to the list of transitioned elements to ensure that the removal of the element from the top layer is deferred until the animation has been completed. This doesn't make a huge difference for simple animations such as this one, but in more complex cases not doing this can result in the element being removed from the overlay too quickly, meaning the animation is not smooth or effective. Again, `transition-behavior: allow-discrete` is required in this case for the animation to occur.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- [`overlay`](/en-US/docs/Web/CSS/overlay) is added to the list of transitioned elements to ensure that the removal of the element from the top layer is deferred until the animation ends. This doesn't make a huge difference for simple animations such as this one, but in more complex cases, not doing this can result in the element being removed from the overlay too quickly, meaning the animation is not smooth or effective. Again, `transition-behavior: allow-discrete` is required in this case for the animation to occur.
```
if the animation is 0.6 iterations, it doesn't complete but it does end (i am so pedantic!!!)

Author: Pedantry rules.

It is also shorter, so I've used it.

> **Note:** We've also included a transition on the [`::backdrop`](/en-US/docs/Web/CSS/::backdrop) that appears behind the popover when it opens, to provide a nice darkening animation. `[popover]:popover-open::backdrop` is used to select the backdrop when the popover is open.

#### Result

The code renders as follows:

{{ EmbedLiveSample("Animating a popover", "100%", "200") }}

> > **Note:** You can find an example that demonstrates transitioning a {{htmlelement("dialog")}} element and its backdrop as it is shown and hidden on the `<dialog>` reference page — see [Transitioning dialog elements](/en-US/docs/Web/HTML/Element/dialog#transitioning_dialog_elements).

Reviewer: 👍

### Transitioning elements on DOM addition and removal

> This example contains a button, which when pressed, appends new elements to a {{htmlelement("section")}} container. Each element, in turn, contains a nested button, which when pressed, removes the element. This example demonstrates how to use transitions to animate elements when they are added to or removed from the DOM.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This example contains a button, which, when pressed, appends new elements to a {{htmlelement("section")}} container. Each element, in turn, contains a nested button, which when pressed, removes the element. This example demonstrates how to use transitions to animate elements when they are added to or removed from the DOM.
```

Author: Do you think your comma-fu can defeat me?

I think this is slightly more correct, so I've gone with it:

> This example contains a button which, when pressed, appends new elements to a {{htmlelement("section")}} container.

Reviewer: that's even better than what ~~Estelle~~ **Grammarly** suggested!

  const closeBtn = document.createElement("button");
  closeBtn.textContent = "✖";
  closeBtn.setAttribute("aria-label", "close");
  divElem.append(closeBtn);
  sectionElem.append(divElem);

  closeBtn.addEventListener("click", () => {
    divElem.classList.add("fade-out");

    setTimeout(() => {
      divElem.remove();
    }, 1000);
  });
}
```

When the "Create new column" button is clicked, the `createColumn()` function is called. This creates a {{htmlelement("div")}} element with a randomly generated background color and a {{htmlelement("button")}} element to close the `<div>` when pressed. It then appends the `<button>` to the `<div>` and the `<div>` to the `<section>` container.

We then add an event listener to the close button via {{domxref("EventTarget.addEventListener", "addEventListener")}}. Clicking the close button does two things:

- Adds the `fade-out` class to the `<div>`. Adding the class triggers the exit animation set on that class.
- Removes the `<div>` after a 1000ms delay. The {{domxref("setTimeout")}} delays removal of the `<div>` from the DOM (via {{domxref("Element.remove()")}}) until after the animation ends.

#### CSS

> 

Author: Added.

> - Removes the `<div>` after a 1000ms delay. The {{domxref("setTimeout")}} delays the removal of the `<div>` from the DOM (via {{domxref("Element.remove()")}}) until after the animation has finished.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Removes the `<div>` after a 1000ms delay. The {{domxref("setTimeout")}} delays the removal of the `<div>` from the DOM (via {{domxref("Element.remove()")}}) after the animation has finished.
```

Author: Not quite right. I've updated it to this slightly different version:

> Removes the `<div>` after a 1000ms delay. The {{domxref("setTimeout")}} delays removal of the `<div>` from the DOM (via {{domxref("Element.remove()")}}) until after the animation ends.

---
title: "@starting-style"
slug: Web/CSS/@starting-style
page-type: css-at-rule
status:
  - experimental
browser-compat: css.at-rules.starting-style
---

{{CSSRef}}{{SeeCompatTable}}

The **`@starting-style`** [CSS](/en-US/docs/Web/CSS) [at-rule](/en-US/docs/Web/CSS/At-rule) is used to define starting values for properties set on an element that you want to transition from when the element receives its first style update, i.e. when an element is first displayed on a previously loaded page.

## Syntax

The `@starting-style` at rule can be used in two ways:

1. As a standalone block, in which case it contains one or more rulesets defining starting style declarations and selecting the elements they apply to:

   ```css
   @starting-style {
     rulesets
   }
   ```

2. Nested within an existing ruleset, in which case it contains one or more declarations defining starting property values for the elements already selected by that ruleset:

   ```css
   selector { /* existing ruleset */
     /* ... */

     @starting-style {
       declarations
     }
   }
   ```

## Description

> To avoid unexpected behavior, [CSS transitions](/en-US/docs/Web/CSS/CSS_transitions) are by default not triggered on an element's initial style update, or when its [`display`](/en-US/docs/Web/CSS/display) type changes from `none` to another value. To enable first-style transitions, `@starting-style` rules are needed. They provide starting styles for elements that do not have a previous state, defining the property values to transition from.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
To avoid unexpected behavior, [CSS transitions](/en-US/docs/Web/CSS/CSS_transitions) are by default not triggered on an element's initial style update, or when its {{CSSxRef("display")}} type changes from `none` to another value. To enable first-style transitions, `@starting-style` rules are needed. They provide starting styles for elements that do not have a previous state, defining the property values to transition from.
```

```css
[popover]:popover-open {
  opacity: 1;
  transform: scaleX(1);
}
```

To specify the starting values of the popover's properties that will be animated using the first method, you include a standalone `@starting-style` block in your CSS:

```css
@starting-style {
  [popover]:popover-open {
    opacity: 0;
    transform: scaleX(0);
  }
}
```

> **Note:** The `@starting-style` at-rule and the "original rule" have the same {{cssxref("specificity")}}. To ensure that starting styles get applied, include the `@starting-style` at-rule _after_ the "original rule". If you specify the `@starting-style` at-rule before the "original rule", the original styles will override the starting styles.

To specify the starting style for the popover using the nested method, you can nest the `@starting-style` block inside the "original rule":

```css
[popover]:popover-open {
  opacity: 1;
  transform: scaleX(1);

  @starting-style {
    opacity: 0;
    transform: scaleX(0);
  }
}
```

## Formal syntax

{{csssyntax}}

## Examples

### Animating a popover

> In this example, the [popover](/en-US/docs/Web/API/Popover_API) can be animated using [CSS transitions](/en-US/docs/Web/CSS/CSS_transitions). Basic entry and exit animations are provided using the [`transition`](/en-US/docs/Web/CSS/transition) property.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
In this example, the [popover](/en-US/docs/Web/API/Popover_API) can be animated using [CSS transitions](/en-US/docs/Web/CSS/CSS_transitions). Basic entry and exit animations are provided using the {{CSSxRef("transition")}} property.
```

#### HTML

The HTML contains a {{htmlelement("div")}} element declared as a popover using the [popover](/en-US/docs/Web/HTML/Global_attributes/popover) attribute and a {{htmlelement("button")}} element designated as the popover's toggle control using its [popovertarget](/en-US/docs/Web/HTML/Element/button#popovertarget) attribute.

```html
<button popovertarget="mypopover">Toggle the popover</button>
<div popover="auto" id="mypopover">I'm a Popover! I should animate.</div>
```

#### CSS

In this example, we want to animate two properties, [`opacity`](/en-US/docs/Web/CSS/opacity) and [`transform`](/en-US/docs/Web/CSS/transform) (specifically, a horizontally scaling transform), to make the popover fade in and out as well as grow and shrink horizontally.

> ```css

Reviewer: During our sync chat, we discussed adding a color to demonstrate that every time a popover opens it goes from start style to popover-oven, not just the first time.

adding background color, then something similar to 

```
Because the popover is transitioning from `display: none` to `display: block, every time the popover opens, it transitions from the `@start-style` styles to the`[popover]:popover-open` styles. When the popover exits, it transitions from `[popover]:popover-open` state to the default `[popover]` state.
```

is helpful. https://codepen.io/estelle/pen/BaMZOgR

Author: As mentioned earlier, I've added a note to explain what is happening, and further explanation and an example. I'd rather not mess with the styling of this example any further.

@starting-style {
  [popover]:popover-open {
    opacity: 0;
    transform: scaleX(0);
  }
}

/* Transition for the popover's backdrop */
[popover]::backdrop {
  background-color: rgb(0 0 0 / 0);
  transition:
    display 0.7s allow-discrete,
    overlay 0.7s allow-discrete,
    background-color 0.7s;
  /* Equivalent to
  transition: all 0.7s allow-discrete; */
}

[popover]:popover-open::backdrop {
  background-color: rgb(0 0 0 / 0.25);
}

/* Nesting (&) is not supported for pseudo-elements
so specify a standalone starting-style block. */
@starting-style {
  [popover]:popover-open::backdrop {
    background-color: rgb(0 0 0 / 0);
  }
}
```

To achieve this, we have set a starting state for these properties on the default hidden state of the popover element (selected via `[popover]`), and an ending state on the open state of the popover (selected via the [`:popover-open`](/en-US/docs/Web/CSS/:popover-open) pseudo-class).

We then set a [`transition`](/en-US/docs/Web/CSS/transition) property to animate between the two states. A starting state for the animation is included inside a `@starting-style` at-rule to enable the entry animation.

> However, because the animated element is being promoted to the [top layer](/en-US/docs/Glossary/Top_layer) when shown and removed from the top layer when hidden (with [`display: none`](/en-US/docs/Web/CSS/display)), some extra steps are required to ensure the animation works in both directions:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Because the animated element is being promoted to the [top layer](/en-US/docs/Glossary/Top_layer) when shown and removed from the top layer when hidden (with [`display: none`](/en-US/docs/Web/CSS/display)), some extra steps are required to ensure the animation works in both directions:
```

Author: Updated

#### HTML

```html
<button>Create new column</button>
<section></section>
```

#### JavaScript

JavaScript enables the addition and removal of elements:

```js
const btn = document.querySelector("button");
const sectionElem = document.querySelector("section");

btn.addEventListener("click", createColumn);

function randomColor() {
  function randomNum() {
    return Math.floor(Math.random() * 255);
  }

  return `rgb(${randomNum()} ${randomNum()} ${randomNum()})`;
}

function createColumn() {
  const divElem = document.createElement("div");
  divElem.style.backgroundColor = randomColor();

  const closeBtn = document.createElement("button");
  closeBtn.textContent = "✖";
  closeBtn.setAttribute("aria-label", "close");
  divElem.append(closeBtn);
  sectionElem.append(divElem);

  closeBtn.addEventListener("click", () => {
    divElem.classList.add("fade-out");

    setTimeout(() => {
      divElem.remove();
    }, 1000);
  });
}
```

> When the "Create new column" button is clicked, the `createColumn()` function is called. This creates a {{htmlelement("div")}} element with a randomly generated background color and a {{htmlelement("button")}} element to close the `<div>` when pressed. It then appends the `<button>` to the `<div>` and the `<div>` to the `<section>` container.

Author: updated
